Masnavi, or mathnaw, is the name of a poem written in rhyming couplets, or more specifically, "a poem based on independent, internally rhyming lines". Most mathnaw followed a meter of eleven, or occasionally ten, syllables, but had no limit in their length. The mathnawi consists of an indefinite number of couplets, with the rhyme scheme aa/bb/cc.
Mathnaw have been written in Persian, Arabic, Turkish, and Urdu cultures.


== Arabic mathnaw ==
Arabic mathnawi poetry is called muzdawidj. It is a poetic style that includes alliteration or a rhyme scheme within the ending words of two lines, and follows a specific meter. It is very similar to the Persian, Urdu, and Turkish mathnawi, with one major difference: most Muzdawidj follows an aaa/bbb/ccc pattern, while the other mathnawi follow an aa/bb/cc pattern.


== Persian mathnaw ==
In Persian mathnaw, the poems strictly adhere to a meter of 11 syllables, occasionally ten. While the length of a mathnaw is not prescribed and is therefore unlimited, most of the better known mathnaw are within a range of 2,000-9,000 bayts (verses). The first known mathnaw poem was written in the Smnid period (4th/10th century). Despite certain dates indicating a possibility otherwise, modern scholars believe it is a continuation of an Iranian verse form, not of its Arabic counterpart(there is some debate that the word mathnaw is derived from Arabic, but most scholars believe that the Persians coined the word themselves).
Mathnaw are usually associated with the didactic and romantic genres, but are not limited to them. There is great variety among Persian mathnaw, but there are several conventions that can help a reader recognize a mathnaw poem. Most mathnaw have a distinction between the introductory and body paragraphs (although it is not always easy to determine where that is), praise of the one God and prayers, a eulogy of the Prophet, reflections on the value of poetry, and occasionally a description of an object as a significant symbol.
Certain Persian mathnaw have had special religious significance in Sufism, such as Rumis Mathnawi-i Manawi, which consists of 6 books/25,000 verses, which has been used in prayer among many Sufis, such as the Whirling Dervishes. While some Islamic legalists find the practice unconscionable, Sufi Abu Hamid al-Ghazali supported the use of poetry as worship.


== Turkish mathnaw ==
Turkish mathnawi began developing in the 8th/14th century. Persian mathnawi influenced Turkish authors, so many Turkish mathnaw (at first) were creative translations and adaptations of Persian mathnaw. The oldest known Turkish mathnaw is a didactic poem called Kutadgu Bilig.
Turkish mathnaw are strongly driven by their plot, and are usually categorized into three genre--mutarib (heroic), ramal (religio/didactic), and hazadj (romantic). Some mathnaw were written with an understanding that the audience would appreciate the importance of the subject of the poem, but some were also written purely for entertainment purposes.
Mathnaw remained prominent in Turkish literature until the end of the Ottoman Empire, when it began to transform into more conversational and rhetorical literature. Few Turkish mathnaw have been translated into a modern language.


== Urdu mathnaw ==
Urdu mathnaw are usually divided into three categories- early, middle, and late.
Early Urdu mathnaw began in the 11th/17th century. In the beginning of this period, many mathnaw were religious in nature, but then grew to include romantic, heroic, and even secular stories. Early Urdu mathnaw were influenced by Dakkan literature, as well as Persian mathnaw. Because of this influence, many early Urdu mathnaw were translations of Persian mathnaw, although there are some original early Urdu mathnaws.
Middle Urdu mathnaw became prominent in the 12th/18th century, when Urdu literature broke away from the Dakkan tradition. In the 12th/18th century, romantic mathnaw became very popular. Another new convention that appeared in middle Urdu mathnaw was authors using their own personal experiences as a subject for their poem.
Modern Urdu mathnaw began in the 13th/19th century, during a time of literary reform. Mathnaw as a whole became much shorter, and the traditional meters stopped being observed. These mathnaw dealt more with everyday subjects, as well as providing a medium for children's poetry.


== References ==